<p>Yogi Berra said it well: "It's tough to make predictions, especially about the future."</p>

Though he wasn’t talking about viral infections or the current pandemic, he might as well have been. Even the best scientists, infectious disease specialists, and epidemiologists have found it hard to accurately predict when new viral outbreaks will appear (think COVID-19), when old ones will reappear (think polio), and how to figure this out in time to make a difference. But what if they could? An already available tool called wastewater testing shows promise — and how we use the results could help rein in the next COVID surge or predict the rise of a surprising new virus.

COVID: When can we expect the next uptick?
For months now, the US has recorded well over 100,000 new COVID-19 cases and 300 deaths each day. And actually, the number of cases is probably much higher because rates of testing have fallen and positive home tests aren’t included in official counts. With numbers like these and new variants emerging, further spikes in cases seem inevitable.

But when?

Perhaps in the next few weeks, as new and highly contagious variants spread. Or possibly in the fall and winter, as we spend more time indoors. Or maybe this virus will surprise us again and wait until next year to resurge.

One huge challenge in containing the COVID-19 pandemic is that by the time we know that infections are rising rapidly in a community, it’s already been going on for some time. Because people often have no symptoms initially, the infection can spread for a while without notice.

If we could predict when the next uptick will happen, it’s possible that we could take appropriate preventive measures. And that’s where your stool — feces, poop, whatever you prefer to call it — comes in.

The idea is simple: when people have a viral infection, the virus can often be detected in their stool. Therefore, wastewater from a town or city, or perhaps a community, can be tested to see if virus is present and, if so, whether the amount is rising over time.